blog: Kaoto 2.3 release (#1267)
apache/camel-website: content/blog/2024/12/kaoto-release-2.3.0/index.md

---
title: "Kaoto v2.3 release"
date: 2024-12-10
draft: false
authors: [igarashitm, lordrip]
categories: ["Releases", "Tooling", "Kaoto"]
preview: "Kaoto 2.3 has been released"
---

![Kaoto](cover.png)

> Following the Apache Camel 4.8.1 release, we're happy to announce the release of Kaoto 2.3.

Reviewer: 4.8.2? 4.9.0? or maybe better to remove this mention?

---
title: "Kaoto v2.3 release"
date: 2024-12-10
draft: false
authors: [igarashitm, lordrip]
categories: ["Releases", "Tooling", "Kaoto"]
preview: "Kaoto 2.3 has been released"
---

![Kaoto](cover.png)

Following the Apache Camel 4.9.0 release, we're happy to announce the release of Kaoto 2.3.

## What’s New in Kaoto 2.3?

We're thrilled to announce the release of Kaoto 2.3, bringing new features, improvements, and bug fixes to enhance your integration experience.
This release also brings the first technical preview of a long awaited feature: the Kaoto DataMapper with the ability to perform data transformations using Camel.

> ## Here are the key highlights of this release:

Reviewer: as it is a title, I think I would turn it more in something like:
* Key highlights
* Key highlights of Kaoto 2.3

but on the other had, it seemsvery redundant with the previous "What's new in kaoto 2.3?"

### Kaoto DataMapper technical preview
In this release, we are introducing the new **Kaoto DataMapper**, a graphical way of authoring data mappings inside your routes using Kaoto.

#### How to use it?
When creating a Camel route, like any other step, just search for **Kaoto DataMapper** in the catalog and add it from there.

| Tile view                          | List view                          |
|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| ![Tile](catalogDatamapperTile.png) | ![List](catalogDatamapperList.png) |

> Once the **Kaoto DataMapper** step is added in the route, you can launch it using by clicking the `Configure` button in config form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the **Kaoto DataMapper** step is added in the route, you can open the DataMapper UI by clicking the `Configure` button in config form.
```

![DataMapper configured](datamapperConfigured.png)

When you don't yet have an active DataMapper canvas opened, if you click the `DataMapper` tab, it shows the built-in step-by-step instructions of how to use Kaoto DataMapper UI.

![DataMapper HowTo](datamapperHowTo.png)

As an initial technical preview version, Kaoto DataMapper only supports XML schema for rendering the data structure.
And it internally generates a single XSLT step to perform configured data mappings at runtime.
While you can consume multiple XML documents with using Camel Variables and/or Message Headers that are mapped to XSLT Parameters, the output is only a Camel Message Body for this release.

#### What's next for the Kaoto DataMapper?

We have a plan to iteratively add more features to the Kaoto DataMapper, for example:
 - JSON support
 - Improve XPath expression editor
   - syntax assist & highlight
   - better Drag and Drop capability for fields and functions
 - Data Preview - feed an example input, and instantly see the mapping outcome directly in the UI
 - Support Setting Camel Variables/Message Headers directly in the UI

>  - Support assuming data structure (schema) by attaching a data example, such as XML instance and JSON instance

Author: I think it should probably "inferring the data structure by attaching a data example"
